=pod

=cut

Copyright (c) 2003-2004, Valient Gough <vgough@pobox.com>
All rights reserved.

EncFS is free software; you can distribute it and/or modify it under the terms
of the GNU General Public License (GPL), as published by the Free Software
Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at your option) any later
version.

=head1 NAME

encfsctl - administrative tool for working with EncFS filesystems

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<encfsctl> [I<command> I<command_args>]

B<encfsctl> I<rootdir>

B<encfsctl> info I<rootdir>

B<encfsctl> passwd I<rootdir>

B<encfsctl> showcruft I<rootdir>

B<encfsctl> decode [--extpass=prog] I<rootdir> [encoded name ...]

B<encfsctl> encode [--extpass=prog] I<rootdir> [plaintext name ...]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<encfsctl> is an administrative tool for working with EncFS filesystems.  It
is capable of changing the user supplied password, displaying basic information
about an encrypted volume, and other related operations.

=head1 COMMANDS

=over 4

=item B<info>

Display basic information about the filesystem.  Takes a single argument,
I<rootdir>, which is the root directory of the encrypted filesystem.  The
filesystem need not be mounted.  B<Info> is also the default command if only a
root directory is provided on the command line.

=item B<passwd>

Allows changing the password of the encrypted filesystem.  The user will be
prompted for the existing password and the new password.

=item B<showcruft>

Recursively search through the entire volume and display all files which are
not decodable (only checks filename encoding, not block MAC headers).  This
might be useful for cleanup in case you've made use of features which create
files which are not decodable under the primary key.

=item B<decode>

Allows you to specify an encoded name on the command line, and displays
decoded version.  This is mostly useful for debugging, as debug messages always
display encrypted filenames (to avoid leaking sensitive data through the debug
channels).  So this command provides a way to decode the filenames.

The B<--extpass> option can be used to specify the program which returns the
password - just like with encfs.

If no names are specified on the command line, then a list of filenames will be
read from stdin and decoded.

=item B<encode>

Allows you to specify a filename on the command line, and displays its
encoded version. This is useful if e.g. you are taking a backup of an
encrypted directory and would like to exclude some files.

The B<--extpass> option can be used to specify the program which returns the
password - just like with encfs.

If no names are specified on the command line, then a list of filenames
will be read from stdin and encoded.

=back

=head1 EXAMPLES

Show information about an encrypted filesystem:

 % encfsctl info ~/.crypt

 Version 5 configuration; created by EncFS 1.1 (revision 20040504)
 Filesystem cipher: "ssl/aes" , version 2:1:1
 Filename encoding: "nameio/block" , version 3:0:1
 Key Size: 192 bits
 Block Size: 512 bytes
 Each file contains 8 byte header with unique IV data.
 Filesname encoded using IV chaining mode.

=head1 DISCLAIMER

This library is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY
WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  Please refer to the "COPYING" file distributed with
B<encfs> for complete details.

=head1 AUTHORS

B<EncFS> was written by B<< Valient Gough <vgough@pobox.com> >>.

=head1 SEE ALSO

encfs(1)
